---
layout: post
title: "CPSC 340: it lives up to the hype!"
---
I took [CPSC 340 (Machine Learning and Data Mining)](https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~shafaei/homepage/courses/340s20/) this past summer and I loved it. I had taken the prerequisite math courses in my second year, back when I thought I would major in Finance and minor in Econ (we know how that turned out). But the math prerequisites turned out to be useful because unlike a lot of BUCS students, I was lucky to not be closed off to this class!

Here are my main takeaways from the course: 

### 1. There IS some math, but it's not the main focus, so don't let math scare you.

One pet peeve I have about our culture overall is that math is used as a way to scare people. "Oh, you won't understand this because it's too much math." Granted, multivariable calculus is not that intuitive. I literally spent 90% of my semester taking Math 200 and 221 in the Math Learning Centre, discussing matrices and trying to wrack my brain on understanding what eigenvalues mean.

But if you've taken and passed the math prerequisite classes, *you are capable* of taking this class. Repeat after me: *I am capable. I can do it.*

The first assignment throws a *ton* of math at first—differentiating equations that are used later in class, reviewing linear algebra rules on matrices that we encounter later. It's overwhelming, I've been there. It was 2 years ago that I took those math classes. *Your overwhelming feeling is ok, it doesn't make you 'incapable' of taking this class.* This is the "weeder" assignment. *It's supposed to be hard.* The TAs are super helpful in office hours to explain the concepts, so make sure to ask them.

The assignments don't get any easier, but the math covered doesn't go more in depth than the first assignment. So hopefully that gives some solace.

### 2. You learn the limitations about the trendiest models.

My goal through this course was to dispel the "magic" air around Machine Learning/Data Science. I think through media, we've come to view machine learning as *the solution* to all problems yet also take all of our jobs, creating more problems.

Job displacement is very, very dangerous and frankly makes me worried for the future. But after taking this class, I don't think that machine learning is as "magical" as we think it is. We learn that models are not clean cut because: 

- Your outliers could be messing up your model (in which case, you need more robustness), or they may be the most important thing you're looking for. But you don't know how outliers look like!
- You could use your features that you have now. But with hundreds of features, you have to do feature engineering or aggregation to make it small enough to understand. But you might lose information!
- Overall: **[don't have blind faith in your models](https://www.ted.com/talks/cathy_o_neil_the_era_of_blind_faith_in_big_data_must_end?language=en).**

Knowing that models are made up from simple (but beautiful) mathematical equations really deflates the magic that surrounds them. So I reached my goal. :) 

### 3. This course prepares you to understand Deep Learning!

Yes, *that* deep learning. Personally, I felt that this particular buzzword felt the least accessible for me to ever understand. But by the end of the course, we're told that we can now crack open [Dive into Deep Learning](http://d2l.ai/) and learn on our own! Even for the Kaggle in-class competition final, many students used Deep Learning in their models.

Yes, that's right. Our instructor took the time to make an in-class competition, which honestly makes him the coolest. If that continues to be a thing (and not just a COVID-19 thing), do you really need any more reasons to take this course? Being able to *train models on real data* and know which models to use and why? I think not. :) 

---

This course has changed my career aspirations and trajectory. I am still open to doing software development, but this opens up a new door to Data Science/Machine Learning/AI/(I'm still not sure what the "right" name for this field is called!).

My next steps will be to take CPSC 440, which will be offered for the first time. It's the undergraduate offering of [CPSC 540](https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~schmidtm/Courses/540-W20/), so we'll see how well I can survive. Then grad school? Full-time work in this COVID-19 economy? I don't know. We'll see, but I'll definitely share my journey with you :) Thanks for reading my first post!